RFC: Officially supported utility buildpacks (#175)
buildpacks/rfcs: text/0000-official-utility-buildpacks.md

# Meta
[meta]: #meta
- Name: Officially supported utility buildpacks
- Start Date: 2021-06-30
- Author(s): [@jkutner](https://github.com/jkutner)
- RFC Pull Request: (leave blank)
- CNB Pull Request: (leave blank)
- CNB Issue: (leave blank)
- Supersedes: N/A

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

This is a proposal to adopt utility buildpacks as officially supported components of the Cloud Native Buildpacks project.

# Definitions
[definitions]: #definitions

> 

Reviewer: We have also talked about project descriptor related parts that can be implemented as buildpacks should be owned by cnb as that would ensure that the project only provides implementation for different parts of the spec. I think that would be a good boundary for the kind of utility buildpacks that the project maintains i.e. it should only provide implementations for things that are spec-ed out.

However, defering to the community and vendors to implement these kinds of utility buildpacks has not necessarily had good results. For example, there are three implementations of the [Procfile buildpack](https://registry.buildpacks.io/buildpacks/paketo-buildpacks/procfile). None of these implementations add significant (if any) advantages over the other. Yet buildpack users are force to decide which one to select. This is an unneccessary burden for a capability that could be provided by default.

We seek to reduce complexity in the lifecycle and provide well maintained utility buildpacks for users by supporting them as official components of the Cloud Native Buildpacks project. This also aligns with our "everything's a buildpack" mantra.

# What it is
[what-it-is]: #what-it-is

> Reserve the `cnb` namespace for officially supported buildpacks. Then, on a case by case basis, we adopt utility buildpacks under this

Reviewer 2: I'm a little worried that this opens a bit of a pandora's box.

We might have a clear distinction of utility buildpacks and _other buildpacks_. But newcomers might likely just be seeing **"officially supported buildpacks"**. Once we start doing this, I'm worried that we'll be pressured to have more of these officially supported buildpacks. If it were me, I'd associate the `cnb/` namespace with the `library/` namespace on DockerHub (_which is what I think cnb namespace should be called, btw_).

I'm sure that newcomers are a bit thrown when they find that they have to go to the [paketo](https://paketo.io/) project to find all of their buildpacks. Which leads me to worry that we will be pit in a (_losing_) competition with the paketo project. If it's going be ours vs theirs, we'll have a hard time covering the ground that they already have.

And finally, "owning, supporting, and maintaining" and "testing buildpacks across stacks" _seems like_ a lot of responsibilities on top of what Implementation team probably already has to do.

But I like the idea 🙂

Reviewer 3: +1 to the Pandora's box comment. I think that having some "official" buildpacks will absolutely prompt people to request more. So where do you draw the line? Technically you only need one buildpack that provides a language runtime binary, should that become an official buildpack too?

In regards to newcomers, I think that can be mitigated with good docs & collaboration with the overall ecosystem. The Buildpacks projects can and should direct users to community resources (in a fair, taking no favorites way). Inform users that there are choices and allow them to pick what makes the most sense for their needs.

Author: These are a very real concerns, and they are the reasons we never included buildpacks in the project in the past.

What makes the buildpacks in this proposal a little different is that they _replace_ native capabilities. In some sense, the support burden is equal to the existing support burden.

I'm not worried about being pitted against Paketo. They should be a different set of buildpacks. If Paketo has utility buildpacks that need to be contributed upstream we can consider accepting them.

Reviewer 3: >What makes the buildpacks in this proposal a little different is that they replace native capabilities. In some sense, the support burden is equal to the existing support burden.

Isn't the idea to reduce burden though? If the burden is equal, then doesn't that make a case for implementing these features in the lifecycle/pack?

IMHO, you can reduce the burden by making it clear that those features won't be part of the buildpack and allowing the community time to fill in the features through buildpacks (see my other comment below).

Author: Our goal is to reduce burden by changing the architecture (i.e. moving logic out of the lifecycle, and reducing coupling). I do not have a goal of removing capabilities/features from the project.

Reviewer 3: > I do not have a goal of removing capabilities/features from the project.

Not suggesting that specifically. You mentioned Procfile in the RFC, so that is what I'm thinking of here. There's no need for buildpacks to directly have a Procfile buildpack because it was a need identified by the downstream communities and they have provided support for it.

All I'm saying is that if there's a clear delineation between what the buildpacks will and won't do, that provides guides and leaves room for the community to come in and implement any features that are marked out of scope but are important to the downstream communities.

Reviewer 4: If we're calling them system buildpacks maybe we can use `cnb-system/` as the namespace?

Examples of potential utility buildpacks include:

> - `cnb/profile` - Evaluating `.profile` scripts in the app repo during launch

Reviewer 4: This isn't meant to replace the `.profile.d` scripts proposed to be removed by #168, but just in the `app` dir?

Author: yes

> - `cnb/inline` - Executing [Inline buildpacks](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/blob/main/text/0048-inline-buildpack.md)

Reviewer 5: I'm a bit confused how this would work - it seems that the inline script would need to be copied to the proper directory under `/cnb/buildpacks` ?? That doesn't feel like a buildpack concern...

Author: I'm not sure I follow. You can see an implementation of this works in https://github.com/hone/inline-buildpack

Reviewer 5: Ohh I see (thank you for linking to the source!). The "inline wrapper" buildpack when run looks in project.toml and runs the script there. I was confusing it with pack's implementation, where the script is copied (I think?).

- `cnb/processes` - Setting app specific process types from a configuration file like `project.toml`
- `cnb/env` - Setting customer environment variables defined in a configuration file like `project.toml`
- `cnb/purge` - Purging files from the app repo before export (similar to [`.slugignore`](https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/slug-compiler#ignoring-files-with-slugignore))

# How it Works
[how-it-works]: #how-it-works

> The utility buildpacks will be owned, supported, and maintained by the [Implementation team](https://github.com/buildpacks/community/blob/main/TEAMS.md#implementation-team).

Reviewer: Should this be the BAT team?

Author: I have no strong opinion

Reviewer 4: If these are things that extensions of the spec/lifecycle I can see the implementation team owning them. Thoughts on this @ekcasey @natalieparellano ?

Reviewer 6: I would vote not to have these maintained by the implementation team to be honest. I think BAT makes most sense.

Reviewer 4: @jabrown85 it just seems somewhat of an awkward fit since these buildpacks are more for platform operators b/c we're pulling out functionality from lifecycle afaict.

Reviewer 3: IMHO, you have to look more at the skills/interests of the team to be maintaining these buildpacks. BAT seems to make the most sense in that light given the BAT team has folks already producing buildpacks and those working on libcnb and trying to make the buildpack development experience as smooth as possible. To me their interests/skills line up very well with this task.

Reviewer 7: @jkutner Can we update this to give ownership to the BAT team. It seems like the BAT team wants to maintain these and the Implementation team doesn't, which seems like the most important consideration to me.

Reviewer 4: For the record I'd like to voice it's a bit out of scope for the BAT team especially as we continue to focus on buildpack tooling which I believe this is out of scope. The overlap is that it'd be nice to dogfood buildpacks with our own tooling, but feels a bit of a miss on the charter. I'm not sure there's a perfect subteam for it.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

> - Bubbling these capabilities up to the user layer (as buildpacks) may add cognitive burden for users and errode the DX. We can mitigate this with new features like "default buildpacks".

Reviewer 5: Should these buildpacks ship with the builder, or the lifecycle?

Author: I think it would interesting to ship them with the lifecycle. But I had Builder in mind.

Reviewer 6: I like shipping with a builder

Reviewer 4: > Should these buildpacks ship with the builder, or the lifecycle?

I think it depends on how we're positioning them. If we want them to be default things that are taken from lifecycle, I think it makes sense to ship with lifecycle. That of course is totally net new and doesn't fit into an existing mechanism. If builders have to build them in, we're essentially saying by default they're off.

Reviewer 3: +1 for builders. It doesn't require any new features or work, plus it provides the most flexibility. The idea of "default" behavior is nice in theory, but downstream buildpack teams need a way to control what buildpacks are run. 

Speaking from the Paketo and VMware proprietary buildpacks standpoint, I need to be able to control the user experience, which means taking out upstream buildpacks that are not needed/wanted or that conflict with conventions we use in our buildpacks. If they are in the lifecycle that would seem to be harder or we'd end up needing to have controls similar to what you get with builders, so why not just use builders.

Author: @dmikusa-pivotal 

> I need to be able to control the user experience, which means taking out upstream buildpacks that are not needed/wanted

Is the builder a good way to do this? That is, if you can create a builder w/o the default buildpacks does that solve the problem. I think that's what you're saying, but wanted to be clear.

If we ship these with the lifecycle, I still imagine there'd be a mechanism to turn them off.

Reviewer 5: Is someone who wants to use utility buildpacks going to have to run `pack build <thing> --buildpack add-my-env-var --buildpack run-my-inline-buildpack --buildpack set-my-process` etc.? That seems cumbersome (vs. just configuring project.toml).

Author: @natalieparellano that's definitely not what I have in mind, but this RFC doesn't propose a mechanism for "default" buildpacks (i.e. buildpacks that would run without the user specifying those verbose args). I intend to create another RFC for that.

- New components to support

> - We have to ensure that each utility buildpack is portable and works in conjunction with all stacks

Reviewer 5: Also all buildpack APIs...

Reviewer 4: On the plus side this means we'll have to dogfood our breaking changes/migrations as a project.

Reviewer 7: I think it is okay for the utility buildpacks to implement a single buildpack API?

Reviewer 5: Would we have multiple versions of each utility buildpack (one per buildpack API)?

Author: I think it would make sense to bump the utility buildpacks API compat and cut a release each time the lifecycle adds a new api version. I also think that makes a good case for Implementation team owning these buildpacks.

Reviewer 5: I'll be honest, I'm a bit wary of the implementation team owning these (we'd be using Buildpack Author Tooling to maintain them...) but at the same time, I could see the argument for it. We could use the utility buildpacks as test fixtures when adding support for a new api. They should ship together (or at least, concurrently). That said, coordination between the two teams to enable this should be possible!

Reviewer 7: > I think it would make sense to bump the utility buildpacks API compat and cut a release each time the lifecycle adds a new api version. I also think that makes a good case for Implementation team owning these buildpacks.

By the same logic the implementation team should maintain `pack` as well, given `pack` should also upgrade to use the latest platform API after the lifecycle cuts a new release. Maybe we need to rename the implementation team because 98% of the code in the project is an implementation of at least one of the spec :p

Reviewer 4: @ekcasey i think we should rename the team. :)

> They should ship together (or at least, concurrently). That said, coordination between the two teams to enable this should be possible!

@natalieparellano I feel like some joint maintenance makes sense but there isn't really that structure today in the project.

# Alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

- Do Nothing - leave the capabilities in the lifecycle, and continue to add more native capabilities

# Prior Art

> [prior-art]: #prior-art

Reviewer: Some other relevant buildpacks https://github.com/samj1912/project-descriptor-buildpack

Reviewer 3: Paketo has several utilities style buildpacks, see here: https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks?q=utilities

I can't speak for the team, but if this proposal goes through I would be up for helping to upstream the utilities Paketo CNBs that make sense.

Reviewer 8: Throwing my hat into the ring as well https://github.com/ForestEckhardt/source-removal

- [inline-buildpack](https://registry.buildpacks.io/buildpacks/hone/inline)

> - [Procfile buildpack](https://registry.buildpacks.io/buildpacks/paketo-buildpacks/procfile)

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- [Procfile buildpack](https://registry.buildpacks.io/buildpacks/paketo-buildpacks/procfile)
- [Paketo Image Labels Buildpack](https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/image-labels)
- [Paketo Environment Variables Buildpack)(https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/environment-variables)
```

# What it is
[what-it-is]: #what-it-is

Reserve the `cnb` namespace for officially supported buildpacks. Then, on a case by case basis, we adopt utility buildpacks under this

Examples of potential utility buildpacks include:

- `cnb/profile` - Evaluating `.profile` scripts in the app repo during launch
- `cnb/inline` - Executing [Inline buildpacks](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/blob/main/text/0048-inline-buildpack.md)
- `cnb/processes` - Setting app specific process types from a configuration file like `project.toml`
- `cnb/env` - Setting customer environment variables defined in a configuration file like `project.toml`
- `cnb/purge` - Purging files from the app repo before export (similar to [`.slugignore`](https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/slug-compiler#ignoring-files-with-slugignore))

# How it Works
[how-it-works]: #how-it-works

The utility buildpacks will be owned, supported, and maintained by the [Implementation team](https://github.com/buildpacks/community/blob/main/TEAMS.md#implementation-team).

The criteria for accepting a utility buildpack into the project is as follows:

> - The behavior provided by the buildpack MUST be defined in the spec or an extension spec.

Author: In the working group we discussed having this target an "API" rather than a spec, but given that the current spec is not decomposed that way, I don't think it makes sense to change the wording this proposal. If we refactor the spec, I think we can change the criteria for accepting utility buildpacks. cc @sclevine @ekcasey

> - The buildpack MUST support arbitrary stacks

Reviewer: Would this involve both linux and windows stacks? Would this also mean all the buildpacks would have to be compiled for all architectures?

Reviewer 7: If we want the `.profile` buildpack to be the first utility buildpack, then I think this requirement is impossible. A `.profile` buildpack will never work on a stack that doesn't include Bash.

Author: I think we may need to let #172 finalize in order to address this. If `[[targets]]` and `os` under that becomes a thing, this will be much easier to deal with.

Reviewer 4: What would that change L51 if that goes through?

Author: It depends on what we decide with #172. If wildcard targets are allowed, then these buildpacks probably use that. Otherwise, they'll have to specific all the targets they support explicitly.

Examples of potential utility buildpacks include:

- `cnb/profile` - Evaluating `.profile` scripts in the app repo during launch
- `cnb/inline` - Executing [Inline buildpacks](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/blob/main/text/0048-inline-buildpack.md)
- `cnb/processes` - Setting app specific process types from a configuration file like `project.toml`
- `cnb/env` - Setting customer environment variables defined in a configuration file like `project.toml`
- `cnb/purge` - Purging files from the app repo before export (similar to [`.slugignore`](https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/slug-compiler#ignoring-files-with-slugignore))

# How it Works
[how-it-works]: #how-it-works

The utility buildpacks will be owned, supported, and maintained by the [Implementation team](https://github.com/buildpacks/community/blob/main/TEAMS.md#implementation-team).

The criteria for accepting a utility buildpack into the project is as follows:
- The behavior provided by the buildpack MUST be defined in an API specification co-located with the buildpack
- The buildpack MUST support arbitrary stacks
- The buildpack MUST support the latest API version

> - The buildpack MUST include detection logic (i.e. it does not always pass)

Reviewer 4: Trying to roll up this comment thread.

```suggestion
- The buildpack MUST include detection logic so it can be disabled.
```

Examples of potential utility buildpacks include:

- `buildpacksio/profile` - Evaluating `.profile` scripts in the app repo during launch
- `buildpacksio/inline` - Executing [Inline buildpacks](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/blob/main/text/0048-inline-buildpack.md)
- `buildpacksio/processes` - Setting app specific process types from a configuration file like `project.toml`
- `buildpacksio/env` - Setting customer environment variables defined in a configuration file like `project.toml`
- `buildpacksio/purge` - Purging files from the app repo before export (similar to [`.slugignore`](https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/slug-compiler#ignoring-files-with-slugignore))

# How it Works
[how-it-works]: #how-it-works

The utility buildpacks will be owned, supported, and maintained by the [Buildpack Authors' Tooling Team](https://github.com/buildpacks/community/blob/main/TEAMS.md#buildpack-authors-tooling-team).

The criteria for accepting a utility buildpack into the project is as follows:
- An [RFC](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs) describing the buildpack MUST be approved.
- The behavior provided by the buildpack MUST be defined in an API specification

> - The buildpack MUST support arbitrary stacks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The buildpack SHOULD support arbitrary stacks
```

> - The buildpack MUST support the latest API version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The buildpack SHOULD support the latest API version
```

- The buildpack MUST include detection logic so it can be disabled.

> - The buildpack MUST NOT install any dependencies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The buildpack MUST NOT install any dependencies in the output image
```

- The buildapck MUST NOT be specific to a language/framework/ecosystem/toolchain
- The buildpack behavior MUST be well-documented on buildpacks.io

> - The buidpack SHOULD only provide functionality that we would added to `pack` or the platform API absent the existence of utility buildpacks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The buidpack SHOULD only provide functionality that we would have added to `pack` or the platform API absent the existence of utility buildpacks
```

The utility buildpacks will be owned, supported, and maintained by the [Implementation team](https://github.com/buildpacks/community/blob/main/TEAMS.md#implementation-team).

The criteria for accepting a utility buildpack into the project is as follows:
- The behavior provided by the buildpack MUST be defined in the spec or an extension spec.
- The buildpack MUST support arbitrary stacks

> - The buildpack MUST support the latest API version

Reviewer 4: Do we care about it support multiple APIs or only one?

Reviewer 7: I don't think we should support multiple APIs. We should support the latest and folks can use older versions if they require an older APIs, or update the lifecycle :)

Reviewer 4: Are we going to bugfix or maintain multiple versions then for older Buildpack APIs?

Author: Maybe we should have the same policy as we would for libcnb

> - The buildpack MUST include detection logic (i.e. it does not always pass)

Reviewer 3: 👍 

Question regarding the last item. It seems a little strict. Can you elaborate on the rationale for this? Is this requirement to only allow buildpacks that can be disabled in some way?

I have seen a number of buildpacks that follow the pattern of always pass, but restrict behavior in other ways (based on bindings, env variables, or buildplan entries). 

Would it be sufficient to say `The buildpack MUST include a way to be disabled` instead?

Reviewer 4: yeah, I'm curious about the thought process behind this one.

Author: I didn't pull this from a specific example. But I suspect that something that _always_ passes detection is something that we might want to have as a native behavior (not a buildpack). `The buildpack MUST include a way to be disabled` seems like a good alternative though.
